good to see again sir good to be here
thank you thanks for coming back man I
really appreciate it this is a perfect
time to talk to someone like you about
our food we're in a very strange crisis
now and you just keep hearing
time and time again in the news how much
ranchers and farmers and people are
really suffering right now and how much
folks who don't have anything to do with
that are now forcing their their being
forced to understand the the importance
of the food supply chain and ranchers
and farmers and all the stuff that we've
taken for granted for quite a long time
now well they sure have and what's
interesting about it is the
juxtaposition between the I'll just call
it the industrial the more you know a
commercial industrial food sector versus
the sector that I'm in which is a a
local centric you know direct direct
sale branded product you know directly
from the farm the pandemic is the best
marketing strategy we've ever seen we're
having we're having the best season
we've ever had and and and and the same
thing was with farmers around the
country as I'll talk to them everyone
that's like us that that that did not go
into the supermarket system basically
that that's selling in their community
and they're in their region
regionally direct me off the farm having
the best best year we've ever had it is
the it is the it's the industrial mega
system that's cracking and so for the
first time we're hearing talk of well
maybe maybe we need to add resiliency to
efficiency and so so yeah the the system
that's cracking there's plenty of food I
mean - plenty of food on farms being
produced but of course as you know milk
is being dumped
pigs are being euthanized the problem is
not at the farm level the problem is in
the Chain of Custody between the farmer
and the consumer and primarily in the in
the the large scale processing situation
yeah these large meat processing places
they've been hit hard by the crown of
iron they have been I mean if you think
about it right now Joe probably in in
the end in the United States the only
places right now where every day
thousands of people come together in
crowded conditions are these big meat
processing plants I mean the offices are
closed the theatres are closed the
convention centers are closed and so the
only place where people are coming
shoulder-to-shoulder thousands every day
are in these mega processing facilities
treats and I my wife actually co-owned a
very small abattoir a slaughterhouse
community slaughterhouse we have 20
employees and and the differences the
difference in the vulnerability in the
exposure and risk factor between our
little 20 person facility where we do
you know maybe 50 to 70 beeves a week
hundred hogs versus these mega plants
that have you know they say beeves
Bebe's like what do you beef beefs yeah
well I thought you said Beavis there's
no such word as beefs it's Bebe's Vee
ves oh yeah Bebe's no okay so the plural
of beef is not beefs its beeves
oh I always thought that beef was just
the meat I never thought I would have
sumed you would say cows well as a
farmer cows are our females who have had
calves that's a very as opposed to steer
years we would be cat or bulls which
would be intact males deer and
non-intact so as a farmer all this
nomenclature Israel you know it's a
normal for you Israel like a theologian
teases out you know Presbyterians and
Methodists and and we just say well
they're Protestants you so so you know
we do we do it's a it's a small facility
and and you know it's been in business
for I don't know what 60 years or so
we've only
now for a little bit less than ten years
but but the difference because we do
stuff by hand workstations you know
these stainless steel work tables are
what you know six seven eight feet wide
three feet to four feet deep and and
each one is a workstation and you've got
three guys out on a kill floor you got
two guys out in you know the cryovac
room you've got four guys in the boning
room you got a guy over here running the
sausage stuffer or the you know the
grinder it's inherently small-scale
spread out completely different
environment than when you're having your
3,000 people in a cool damp environment
from and I don't want to get into a
rabbit trail discussion but but frankly
in these great great big plants most of
the workers are generally not Americans
they're there they're coming from other
countries looking for you know the
American dream and so they're living in
crowded conditions because they're
trying to save every penny to send home
to get you know uncle and aunt and other
family members here from Ethiopia
Somalia you know wherever it is and and
so they're there they're living in a
house that we would live for in a house
they're living you know 20 and they're
eating poorly they're in a they're in a
stressful they're there they're often
separated from their family there's just
a lot of stress in their lives and and
and so then you throw these big
processing facilities they're not
they're not eating well and it's just
it's just an incubator I mean if you
wanted to create an incubator for a
virus there wouldn't be a better place
where as small facilities are inherently
the workers are spread out they tend to
come from the community they tend to be
career craft people rather than just you
know make this cut Mack yeah the average
poultry processing plant in our area
they say that every job can be learned
in 20 minutes mmm
so whereas at our plant we cross you
know we we cross do you know we cut me
too wild and then we go pack a while
then you're on the cut floor and then
you're you know you're doing different
things so it's a real different
environment and so these big plants are
very vulnerable and that's why the
recalls come from there the you know the
microbials come from there I mean an
average an average fast-food hamburger
has pieces of 600 animals in it
Wow when you get a hamburger from us
it's one animal you know so the just the
sheer whatever mixing you know so you
know for sure we don't know a lot about
this virus for every we're learning
every day and you know you got to kind
of take a little bit a grain of salt too
but one of the things we're certainly
learning is that there's an advantage
that there is a density factor a people
density factor like an urban rural you
know spreading out the whole social
distancing spreading out thing is seems
to be a valuable thing and so if we take
that into the food system wouldn't it be
an amazing thing if instead of having a
hundred and fifty to two hundred mega
processing facilities doing 98 percent
of the nation's meat if instead that
were two hundred thousand small-scale
community-based ecologically nested
facilities you know all around the
countryside that would be an incredibly
resilient system so it sounds like a
much better system like as you you were
talking before about your relationship
with your customers it's a direct to
farm I mean that's really ideal right
cut out the middle person there's you
cut out the confusion whether or not the
animals are ethically raised or
ethically slaughtered like what are the
conditions they're living under I mean
your Polyface farms right so that that
whole video that you have that I've seen
that explains the way you do
regenerative farming
you let these animals live the way these
animals are supposed to live they're not
confined to cages they're roaming around
they're eating natural foods and you get
a better product you get a healthier
product and get a better relationship
with both the animals and the people
that you sell this this food to well
sure and and ultimately what we're
looking for is a habitat that allows you
know each life-form whether it's a plant
or an animal to fully Express when we
call it you know expressing the pigness
of the pig or the chicken s of the
chicken you could say the tomatoes of
the tomato you know and and creating a
habitat that allows that life that life
to express its you know it's it's uh
Fino typical and physiological
distinctiveness in humans we would call
this self affirmation you know then the
toughness of Tom the Jonas of Joe right
it's that affirmation and and one of the
things that we're seeing as a result as
we move into the kind of the social
consequences of this whole pandemic is a
is what there's there's a new phrase
called the screen New Deal where
everything is going to AI we're gonna
you know what we're demonizing and so at
a very time when people need to be
personally affirmed they're being denied
their you know their their social
humanity element I mean you can't even
see whether a person's smiling or
frowning yeah yeah that's the worst part
about this other than the tragedies the
worst part about this is that like
people aren't getting hugged people are
scared to shake hands
everyone separated from everybody it's
just very strange it is it is and and
you know our our personal energy that we
get from each other you know like you
I'm sure I've done numerous zoom things
lately
more than ever zoom conferences zoom
phone conferences different things and
there's just not the energy there's just
there's just not you just
don't get the energy that you get when
you're right in front of each other yeah
I feel the same way about podcasts and
you know Jamie I screwed up I forgot the
nurse
we started early yeah yeah can we okay
we're gonna want to give you a
coronavirus test okay you down with that
that's fine I will pause right here well
okay so we did you a little test and
found that you have not had it you
didn't fight it off bummer but the
doctor did explain to us that there is
primary immune system and their
secondary immune system your primary
immune system most likely if you've been
in contact with it and his has you know
his he's the doctor has been around many
many people that have had it but your
primary immune system if you're healthy
he was saying fights it off your
secondary immune system is if you have
had it the infection and your body has
developed those antibodies it's your
second line of defense so most likely
your first line of defense since you
have been in contact with people that
have had it your first line of defense
beat it well that's cool yeah well I I
work on it yeah we were talking about
that and I said please save this because
it's so crazy yeah you drink explain
what you do yes so you know in this
whole thing like you I've been I've been
screaming let's talk about the immune
system you know so so I literally I
literally have not been sick a day
basically in 20 years I mean not the flu
not a cold not I mean just nothing and
and I'm 60 63 so I'm not saying that
arrogantly or proudly I'm saying it
gratefully that that I think there are
things that we can do to really build up
our immune system one of the things that
I do that kind of makes all my staff
laugh is that I routinely bend down with
the cows and drink the drink water out
of the Cal tank I don't drink it when
it's pond water although I've drunk pond
water but when it's you know when it's
when it's like well water you know when
it's fairly clean water I get down of
course you know the cows are dripping
saliva and stuff in it you know and I
just drink right out of it just like a
cow and I'm serious you know I believe
that that that what it builds your
microbiome you know I
what all those bugs all that diversity
we we live in the most amazing
microscopic soup I mean it's it's just
it's a soup if you could take an
electromagnetic photograph of the air of
where we are I mean the very skin is
exuding stuff you know our noses are our
clothes everything we're it would look
like a it would look like the the cloud
over Pigpen and the Peanuts comic strip
that's literally what we're living in
and and and all of this life all of you
know bacteria viruses bacteria
microorganisms all of this life is is
literally having a conversation hey you
know I'd like to hook on to you in a
symbiotic relationship hey man I'm a
parasite I'm gonna take you down you
know it's like it's like a drama it's
like I'm Way that's going on inside of
us outside of us and the thought that we
can somehow whatever you know isolate
ourselves and and and extract ourselves
from this from this magnificent life
conversation that's going on in us on
our skin our clothes our hair our eyes
is is it's just silly and it's part of
how our immune system works you know our
immune system actually I need your bugs
my immune system needs your bugs your
immune system these my bugs and and so
now does that mean we all run into the
nursing homes you know and take
vulnerable no no no you there I mean
there are there are certainly people
that are very vulnerable so we want to
careful there all right I I get that but
for the for the rest of us that are
generally healthy going about our daily
stuff I mean goodness worry worry
affects your
cortisol limits almost more than
anything worry you know I got on a plane
yesterday to come out here and thanks
for the nice business class ticket by
the way and and and the lady sitting in
front of me so we're in business class
I'm sitting so there's four there's a
aisle and there's two seats on either
side and so I sit down there's nobody
next to me I'm in next to the window a
lady in front of me is on the aisle so
she's a little bit diagonal for me in
front a guy sits across from her on the
aisle on the opposing aisle and she
asked him to move over to the window and
and I'm just watching this play out of
course I'm trying to you know keep my
glasses from fogging up with my mask in
my face you know and I'm thinking that
she's worried she's fearful what have we
done to ourselves as a culture that
every single person we come in contact
with is a might be my killer you know I
mean that's a that's a horrible and so
what does that do to our cortisol boom
you know and and suddenly our immune
system is whatever compromised because
we're living in this in this fear all
the time I think one of the things you
said though when you said most of us
that are healthy I think that's not
really true I think most of us are not
healthy and I think that's one of the
things we're finding out from this
crisis yes is that when you talk about
protecting vulnerable people there's a
lot of us that are vulnerable maybe not
you or me right but a large number of
people that are overweight that heat
poor food and that don't take care of
themselves and those people are
particularly vulnerable and so they're
right to be afraid but they're wrong to
think that this the only way to solve
this is to make sure that you stay away
from everybody the way to solve this is
to stop eating shit and become a healthy
person it's while you're alive there's
always a there's a moment like a chance
to be healthier while you're alive if
you're alive and you're not terribly ill
and dying that you could start
in water stop drinking soda stop eating
chips start eating fruits and vegetables
start eating lean meats healthy foods
not even lean meat seed seed eat a good
ribeye steak pastor bastard meats yeah
food yeah you're right well you know
whenever I watch a newscast and watch
the you know the daily like you know
coronavirus briefing from the White
House right and you've got all these
experts standing around in there and and
everybody's standing there waiting for
this magic vaccine and of course you
know the CDC gets four point six billion
dollars a year selling vaccines they
have whatever 20 patent vaccines and and
so really the CDC is a very vested
interest in trying to develop a vaccine
there's there's a lot of money in
sickness now there's a lot of money in
sickness and so so you know we didn't
get this this coronavirus because of a
lack of vaccine we got this coronavirus
because something in this in this
beautiful life bath that I described
without a whack that's that now you know
we can we can start discussing where it
possibly came from I think right now
that's conjecture I mean I think we do
know that it came out of Wuhan but but
you know just how I mean we're not sure
but the fact is that there was an
imbalance in life and just like in your
and in our lifetime Joe we've learned to
say words that when I was a child did
you ever hear the term you know
salmonella E coli Campylobacter bovine
spongiform encephalopathy food allergy
even I mean how many kids in elementary
school did you know they had food
allergies none none nobody you have a
birthday party mom isn't having to email
we didn't even have any mail back then
but mom isn't calling all the other
mothers saying well now what can your
child eat and what can what can your
little merry have and you know Oh Peter
we better not have any peanuts and I
mean that didn't exist and what's
happened the way I look at this is that
that humanity that we as collective
humanity we've essentially taken this
beautiful benevolent earth this
benevolent sustainer partner mentor
abundant provider and taken it taking
this partner to the boxing ring and
instead of caressing this abundant
wonderful partner provider
we've pummeled it and pummeled it we've
we've pulled the water out of its
aquifer we've we've destroyed its soil
we've we've put a dead zone the size of
the Rhode Island in the Gulf of Mexico
we've we've we've used antibiotics and
animals and made mersa and c-diff and
superbugs and and and and so nature has
been gently gently begging for for
relief as we've essentially you know put
our foot put our foot on her neck right
and she and she saying
coli Salmonella you know spongiform
encephalopathy right and including
diabetes and you know all these other
things and we simply don't listen and
continue to pummel and eventually
eventually when our Benevolent nest
whatever you know is
Kayode we find out oops maybe we should
have paid attention yeah and I think a
real parallel is when you were talking
about these large scale meat processing
plants are a perfect sort of petri dish
for viruses to grow so our factory farms
so are these farms where your stuff in
pigs next to each other you're doing all
this unnatural stuff right it's
unnatural for people to be stuffed into
a warehouse right next to each other
shoulders shoulder working all day it's
unnatural for them to be stuffed in
these homes shoulder-to-shoulder with
bad food and and all the things that you
would need to keep your body healthy and
strong the same can be said about these
factory farms in situations one
that I find so attractive about the way
you run your farm is that there's no
weirdness in watching these animals
during the day they seem like animals
just doing normal stuff if you see a
chicken wandering around just pecking at
the grass looks normal
see a chicken in a cage getting fed out
of a little cup or something it looks
all kinds of fucked up right it doesn't
feel right that's what we you know we we
have the phrase respecting the pigness
of the pig and the chicken us of the
chicken and we know that these diseases
are all coming from these place I mean
there's a ton of agricultural diseases
you know that are based from these
factories you have situations where
these animals live in these really
horrific conditions and then the
bacteria jump and look I mean they're
they're they're eat look if you ate in
your toilet every it would you like to
eat your toilet every day right that's
that's how they eat you're there
breathing in their fecal particulate
matter which is you know putting lesions
in their tender respiratory membranes
making making lesions there Minh and so
when you have those kinds of conditions
and they're not getting exercise or not
getting fresh air and so I mean the the
they're not getting salad they're not
getting any vitamin D from the sunshine
and so what happens is you get an
extremely concentrated host host
facility for pathogenicity mmm that's
what happens you get a very concentrated
host facility because there's always a
host they're close to each other the
pathogen doesn't have to say Wow boy I
wonder if I can make it that you know
that half mile over to another no oh
they're you know they're always right
there and so you're right it's like it's
like an incubator and so you know if we
wanted to sit down look if we wanted to
sit down and say let's say we had a
James Bond conspiracist you know and
said we're gonna form a committee and
and make a pathogen friendly farm you
know the old James Bond nemesis right
and so we form a committee say how can
we make a pathogen friendly farm well
we would have only one species we'd
crowded up we'd take out the oxygen the
the fresh air the sunshine we'd give it
we'd give it a minimal a minimalistic
diet what I've just described is modern
efficient industrial factory farming you
couldn't design a better system for for
conductivity of pathogenicity now here's
the big question is it possible to feed
all of Los Angeles using your methods
can you can you feed big urban areas
using these regenerative methods sure
absolutely so so so two things to
realize is the the bottleneck in the
food system right now the reason the
supermarket is low on meat is not
because there aren't animals in the
field it's because of the prop the
processing is the but it's not the
trucking it's not the production it's
not even the it's not even the store
shelf it's it's the processing so it's
the processing that's the bottleneck and
so so so my vision is that so we could
get the two questions first of all deal
with the production with the production
absolutely if we if we spread out the
production if we if we did for example
you know if we took all the confinement
chicken houses and put those chickens on
pasture no problem okay it doesn't take
any more land to grow the feed for a
chicken on pasture than it does in a
confinement house don't you get a lot
more loss though due to raptors and
things along those lines no no it's no
no we put it we put them in in little
protected shelters then we move them
everyday across the pasture
well yeah you you can get losses from
from Raptors but we use guard geese
their guard dogs guard llamas there's
all sorts of guard animals there's
really cool and there's and there's a
lot of research being done to jam the
radar of you know Eagles and stuff there
I mean really oh yeah oh yeah they Jam
the rate I didn't even know they had
radar well that's figurative right what
are they using when they wear needle
it's just not just there
insanely good right yeah it particularly
it really is it really is and so for
example I know one guy that's he it's
not it's not ready to sell yet but he
claims to have had great success
putting reflective coke can bottoms on
like a traffic cone hanging it out with
his chickens and that splays the sun
rays all out and messes up the eyesight
of the of the Eagles and the Hawks they
they can't zero in really yeah in in
fact this was exactly one of the
defensive measures the US Navy used and
still uses for incoming missiles that
they they have a cannon that blows out
pieces of aluminum foil basically and it
like a graffiti aluminum foil graffiti
out of the air and it jams the whatever
the you know the the honing devices of a
missile hmm the Hawks are the same way
what I'm getting at is that there there
are we don't lose very much we protect
them greatly
there are a lot of things that you can
do to you know to mitigate that kind of
pressure but but the fact is the
industry loses tons of birds to in a
flood in a heat wave in a whatever you
know and and so the idea that these
birds in this big confinement house are
actually protected from malady this is
simply not is simply not good and
they're gonna be much more of them are
gonna get sick and sure they might have
losses in that way sure sure so so can
we produce can we produce the food this
way absolutely now one of the things
that it would require is many more
people on farms so you know I thought a
lot about obviously as unemployment has
skyrocketed through this right now
sitting here it's hard for us to imagine
what it'll take to bring you know
to fill football stadiums again to fill
Caribbean cruises to fill theaters you
know music venues you know whatever
boxing matches I mean right now it's
hard to conceive what it'll take people
are so terrified it's hard to appreciate
how much of this is going to come back
the hospitality industry and all that so
what's going to happen so so where are
the jobs what are people going to do and
and I would suggest that one of the
things that that people can do is that
we can have a lot of these smaller
plants and we have way more people
actually growing food participating in
food production personally is food gonna
be more expensive maybe so but you get
to be healthy and we have a healthy
planet and what's that worth and how
much more do you think it would cost for
I mean if you just give a rough
percentage if you're thinking about food
production right now with the current
situation there's a lot of automation
right a lot of these factory farms they
don't require too many people to be
working sure sure you would require much
more people get you'd have to manage
these animals you'd have to do it sort
of along the lines the way that you do
yeah how many more people you think
would be involved in a large-scale firm
lots lots be my eye I don't have I don't
have a number there but I can tell you
that that prices would you know food
prices might go up to what they were 30
years ago and it also would it be fair
to say that food prices might go to
where they should be like a cheeseburger
really shouldn't be $0.99 no no
absolutely as you're very familiar with
the argument of the externalize costs
they don't they don't get captured
what's what's the cost you know right
now 50% of the cases of diarrhea in the
u.s. are caused by food borne you know
bacteria well what's what's a case of
diarrhea worse yeah if we start if you
start you start putting dollars on these
externalize costs you know the the dead
zone in the Gulf of Mexico the fact that
we have you know hundreds of square
miles that don't grow
shrimp anymore you know because it's
it's toxic from the runoff from the
Mississippi from from chemical farming
so there's there's a lot of these
externalize costs and not only that but
if this actually became normal the the
the new way the new orthodoxy there
would be definitely economies of scale
that we don't have right now I mean I'll
just give you one example that probably
nobody would think of so we play we pay
workmen's compensation at our farm so
how do you determine the exposure level
the risk factor of a poultry worker I
mean think about if if you have a Tyson
chicken farm and you hire an employee to
be in the chicken house think about his
workman's comp risk I mean there's fecal
particulate all day long that he's
breathing
you've got augers chains feed bins
electrical connections dust I mean it's
it's a very it's a high-risk situation
for us a poultry worker goes out in the
field and move some move some chickens
in a field
there's no fecal particulate there's no
dust there's no you know there's no
augers there's no whatever spinning fans
vent shafts you know there's none of
this and so so part of the cost the
reason that our chicken is more
expensive than what's in the store is
not only externalize cost but it is it
is unrecognized unrecognized savings
that we offer that can't be captured in
a square peg in a round hole hmm I see
what you're saying yeah the the overall
big picture of health
for you health for the food how much is
that worth Yeah right that's interesting
that we're not really taking into
consideration these secondary costs that
come about from doing it the wrong way
yeah we're not we're not I mean there's
there's a lot of those you you can much
much of our increased cost has nothing
to do with actual production cost it's
it's the non-scalable regulatory
overheads
and and this and this of course is why
we don't have more community small-scale
abattoirs around the country it's not
because there's not a demand for them
it's because the the the paperwork the
hasit plants hazardous analysis critical
control point plans and the paperwork to
be able to launch a business like this
require the are so high that the both
time and money are so high that it's
very difficult to launch a small
business hmm
you know because you can't spread the
overhead of capitalization over is there
a solution to that well there's a couple
solutions certainly one one that's
that's being championed right now by
congressman Thomas Massie called the
prime act he's had it in for five years
and amazingly it's kind of just
floundered for five years all of a
sudden in the last two months he's got
18 new co-sponsors because of this and
what the prime act would do it would
allow it would allow uninspected custom
processed meat in state to be sold by
the piece that's not legal right now
right now the only way that you can sell
a t-bone if you want to buy a t-bone
steak for me the only way for you to get
it is for me to go to a federal
inspected slaughterhouse get the animal
processed packaged under inspection and
put in for you custom houses are where
if you want to buy a half a beef a
quarter beef alright and it goes in with
your name on that quarter and their
custom processing it for me yeah then
you know then I can buy it and what what
congressman Massey is saying with the
prime act is why should we discriminate
and only allow people to tap into the
lower cost and lower lower overheads of
the custom processing facility
to only those people who can afford to
buy a quarter of beef at a time that's
that's very poverty discriminatory let's
open that up so that people can buy it
buy the piece we're not going to ship an
interstate we're not gonna sell it at
Walmart
okay there's but if you and I as
neighbors want to do business together
as and I'm using a powerful phrasing
here as consenting adults if we want to
exercise freedom of joy of choice and
participate in a consensual relationship
of Commerce why should that be a
bureaucrats business between you know
between two consenting neighbors right
so what you saying is as long but is the
the regulatory process in place to make
sure that people are using the proper
sanitation methods making sure that the
animals are healthy making sure that all
these things are in place so that
unscrupulous characters don't take
advantage of the system and then screw
over the consumer and the consumer gets
sick like this is like best-case
scenario for the regulation right that
it's there to protect us well that's
that's the that's the assumption yes and
I would simply ask that at some point
when you have a very close transparent
relationship one-on-one you don't you
don't have you know truckers and
warehouses and big slaughterhouses and
and and you know supermarkets blah blah
blah in between us there is there is a
lot of protection in that relational
transaction that beats all the paperwork
you can amass on the industrial scale we
we recognize scale in a lot of things in
life for example in Virginia where I'm
from if you want to open a if you want
to do daycare let's say you want to do a
work at home deal you know you want to
do a side gig and keep children you can
keep up to 3:00 in your home without
subjecting yourself to the licensing and
compliance of daycare regulations
because they know if all you're gonna do
is
three in your homes those parents you're
gonna have a close relationship with
them it's not a this is not a daycare
center all right all right the same
thing is true with elder care my wife's
grandmother spent her last year in a
ladies home who is allowed to keep three
people as elder care she was an RN she
wanted to not have to go to the hospital
every day and started a side gig in her
home she cooked for them she took care
of them three of them in her home does
this vary state by state it does vary
state by state I'm just giving you an
example of where of where reason where
where it's reasonable to appreciate that
a different relationship at scale yes
can create its own safety in that
particular thing can you keep a hundred
in your home without a license
no but three if you're only going to
keep three you're probably going to see
them you're probably going to have a
direct relationship with each of their
of their caregivers they're you know
they're people that are signing off for
them it's a different relationship and
so all I would say is that from the
safety issue that there needs to be some
place a point at which we can opt to do
business with each other without a
bureaucrat involved I ask you this if
you wanted to slaughter a cow and then
you wanted to give some of the meat away
to your neighbor would you have to bring
it to some perfectly legal perfectly
legal so this is not a yeah if it were
if this were all about safety right you
wouldn't be able to do that so so the
important thing to realize is that the
the prohibition here is not on the in
fact our neighbor can even buy it
legally oh really
I just can't sell it so the prohibition
is only on one if you can't sell it how
are they gonna buy it black market so if
yeah if I if I if I did this under the
radar okay so I butcher a chicken in my
backyard and the neighbor comes over and
buys it from me
okay it's legal for him it's legal for
him to buy it he's not looking for me to
sell it but every but everything else in
society that we've discerned determined
is a hazardous a controlled substance
hazardous substance the prohibition is
both on seller and buyer right and I
don't want to go down that rabbit hole
either of I'm a pretty libertarian you
know drug let it all go but but but
without regard to that the the
prohibitions are equal on even
possession if you want to if you want to
have a ton of cocaine in your house you
even if you just want it over there in a
corner on a pallet yeah I've got a ton
of cocaine here what's wrong with that
you can't have that all right right but
when it comes to food products the
prohibitions are only on one side and
they don't include if you give it away
so if it was really dangerous you
shouldn't be able to buy it you
shouldn't be able to possess it and you
shouldn't be able to give it away I see
what you're saying kinda but the
difference is first of all cocaine is
illegal beefs not illegal and second of
all it's like you're trying to the ideas
you're trying to protect the consumer
right and I think that they have
exceptions for these small situations
where you're the farmer and this may be
this guy's growing tomatoes and you
trade them some filet mignon for some
tomatoes and you have a good deal there
that makes sense that they you know I
think it's more reasonable they step
back and let that happen
but it is odd that they can buy
unregulated beef but you can't sell
unregulated beef so it's like well how'd
you get that beef I bought it is it
regulated no all right
don't even go whose it was the criminal
selling you their beef yeah that's very
strange yeah yeah the for the farmers
the one that's liable the the the buyer
is that the customer is not but the same
thing is true I mean the important let's
appreciate to for example a wildlife I
mean right now you can go out and during
hunting season and you can shoot a deer
and you don't have to worry about
temperature you know you don't have to
worry about any inspections nothing
or a wild pig right squirrel you can
bring that home and there's there's no
inspection no nothing over that and you
can dress that yourself I mean a butcher
it package it whatever feed it to your
children you could have a block party
invite all your your block and have a
and and feed everybody with that food
that's perfectly legal but to do a
chicken or a pig or a cow edit on your
own and and sell that what is what is it
about about selling something that
suddenly turns it from benign to
hazardous well I think it's just
protection for the consumer and I think
it's also like it'd be fine if it was a
small neighborhood where you you knew
the farmer and you had a great
relationship with them but they're
talking about doing things at scale when
you're talking about selling food to you
know a large city it's something you
can't really just hope the guy did a
good job that's the argument for
regulation the argument sure regulation
is when things scale up well you need
someone to step in and protect the
consumers because if there is one bad
actor who's not taking care of it he has
the potential of sickening thousands of
people right which is which is the
argument exactly the argument for
decentralizing and the amalgamating as
opposed to centralizing and amalgamating
is it what is it a land issue though
like if you wanted it like the factory
farms that I've ever seen in videos
where they have these pigs they're
stuffed next to each other when it's
large warehouse and the same with the
chickens right how much space would you
need to have the same amount of chickens
and the same amount of pigs you know if
you let them free rein all right here
here's my point what you don't see in
those videos is you don't see the
hundreds of acres growing corn and
soybeans to feed them in that house the
industry wants you to think that this is
some sort of a you know an island you
know where it were we're cranking this
out of this house they're not showing
you the tractor trailers bringing in the
grain bringing in the fan hauling out
the manure and the square miles of
fields to spread the manure okay they're
not showing
you how dependent that is on this
massive land base and so so on in the
pastored model the decentralized
pastored model instead of having 15,000
I mean our farm we're gonna raise like
forty five thousand chickens this summer
we're not we're not backyard by any
means but guess what those are in 275
bird shelters that are moved every day
across pastures it doesn't take one more
acre to produce the feed or handle the
manure whether the chicken is outside or
inside the difference is when you come
and see our operation you see all the
land when you see the factory farm you
don't see any of the land but isn't it
possible that these factory farms are
set up where the farms where the animals
are raised are completely separate it's
a separate business from the farms where
the soybeans and the corner yeah well
ours is done on the same property no
it's ours is too we we bought we buy our
grain from neighbors absolutely but if
they had to grow these animals and grow
that food would they have enough land to
do everything together in the same farm
but there's no need to do it on the same
farm I'm a big believer in mutual mutual
interdependence not complete
independence we don't have any intention
to grow our own grain we we don't have
the soils for it we don't have the
equipment for it we don't have the
skillset for it so we buy from neighbors
who do GMO free non-genetically modified
GMO free grain and and we give them more
than they would on a commodity on the
commodity scale and so they love us
because we're giving them more per
bushel and they have a nice secure buyer
and they're local they're close you know
we're not getting it from you know
foreign countries and it's all closed so
what happens is in in the kind of
describing instead of having a
fundamentally segregated food system you
have a fundamentally integrated food I
said that's that that's what happens
translation should people grow so for
example I mean you started the
discussion with King Los Angeles you
know they're enough land to feed Los
Angeles you know
that and we and we could discuss whether
there's where the Los Angeles should be
as big as it is I mean that that's a
valid discussion that's a very valid
discussion but but but let we can go
there but first let me just say that if
California for example did not export I
don't know what the percentage is but
it's huge
you know almonds all over the world if
California is centered on feeding
California there's absolutely enough
here to feed California okay
I mean Iowa Iowa imports 90% Iowa is
probably the most fertile place in the
world and they only eat only only 10% of
the food consumed in Iowa is grown in
Iowa and processed in Iowa that's pretty
crazy
it is crazy Hawaii only 5% 95% comes
from off Hawaii I mean they've got
ranches they've got I mean why would you
have to import stuff if you can grow
pineapples pineapples and you know
macadamia nuts in your backyard come on
you know so there's a there's a huge
there's a huge disconnect I mean the the
Prada and this is one of the reasons
that we're having this I think this this
blowback from nature is that instead of
having a fundamentally integrated system
I mean think of how in Switzerland you
know they take the cows up to the
mountain pastures they milk and the milk
flows down at the and they make cheese
up there the way from the cheese goes
into the into the pigs the pigs eat the
way and so instead of transporting milk
to a centralized cheese maker and pigs
to a centralized processor they're
actually making the cheese on-site so
all they've got to actually transport is
cheese and and and pork so they
slaughter they slaughter you know
contiguous nearby not on the same farm
necessarily but but nearby
so you don't have all this
transportation what you have is they
fundamentally
decentralized we could even say
democratized can we say food distance
food food food distancing that that
creates resiliency in the system so
instead of being tied to these hundred
150 mega processing facilities were
decentralized throughout the land base
with how much more money do you think it
would cost for food we would kind of
touched on this earlier but it's right
you're dealing with this more natural
based system and it's more complex it's
going to require more people and it's
gonna require complete restructuring of
the system that's currently in place
sure it would I think I don't have a
figure I'm not science food I think I
think in general it would be probably
double which you pay at Costco double
mm-hmm yeah that's so for a lot of folks
well but but now think about this think
about this you oh man where do you start
with this first of all you're gonna
you're gonna offer a lot of jobs there a
lot of people that are gonna be looking
for jobs right now
so so this offers a lot of job
opportunities number two it's much more
healing on the land number three you
don't have all the the pathogenicity you
know you don't have to use drugs
antibiotics I mean our meat doesn't do
drugs okay our dinner doesn't do drugs
people don't realize that you know two
thirds of the drugs used in the country
aren't in people they're in animals okay
so you don't have those issues there are
a lot of issues that you that you don't
have and those those add up in the big
picture so I always tell people our food
is the cheapest aggregate food there is
we just put all the costs in all our all
our costs are in okay and and so we're
not we're not asking taxpayers Society
the planet we're not asking them to pick
up the tab for you know for cheating for
for cutting for cutting corners and
that's what so is and what's what's
interesting is that that forty years ago
right now today
9% of the average person's income 9% is
spent on food that's our average in our
country 40 years ago it was 18 hmm 40
years ago 9 percent of our personal
income was spent on health care today
that's 18 percent isn't that interesting
how those have inverted yeah very those
have inverted in rough-in roughly 40
years ever since the US duh called the
u.s. duh created the food pyramid and
put Twinkies and Cocoa Puffs on the
bottom as a foundational and you can
track the diabetes you can track obesity
you can track all of these things right
through from that time it's that's an
interesting way to look at costs right
like we're only looking at the cost of
meat we're not looking at the cost for
your health the cost of health care yeah
when you see steak at Costco it's
insanely cheap it almost doesn't it's
almost obscene it's like right how is a
steak that cheap but what are you doing
like how is it possible you know yeah
well it's it's you know there there are
all sorts of special you know whatever
fraternal negotiated things to make that
happen and and the fact is that you
don't have to watch the news very much
to know that farm suicide is spiking you
know there's there are implications I
mean the whole the domino effect of
dysfunction there's a reason why rural
America has a bigger opioid problem than
than urban America you know the pandemic
has been primarily an urban situation
but the opioid crisis has been primarily
a rural situation why because folks feel
dissing one of the biggest you know one
of the biggest things that this virus is
brought out you know they say that the
crisis never makes it never makes a
trend it simply accelerates or brings
into focus a trend that was already
there
and one of the trends has been happening
in this country now for twenty years
is a bifurcation of access between rural
and urban to the internet like on our
farm you know we we still you know we
still have hours of the day where we
can't get cell phone service we can't
get internet service somebody comes to
the store and we can't run our credit
card because the Wi-Fi is down it's very
very slow very problem we can't do Skype
we you know we barely can do it when I
do zoom calls it kicks me off about
three times every hour right now that
sounds like a magic place that you live
yeah that's the thing that people are
having a hard time with this digital
detoxing right I understand much of it
in their lives I I get that I get that
but when you're running a business right
or you're trying to do schoolwork from
home
yeah so what's happening is we are now
we're now getting a very very
accelerated urban-rural divide of
opportunity because because rural we
don't have we don't have this this
access and you know I'm not asking for a
get big government programs but I am
telling you know I'm telling you that
that this this this access to broadband
internet especially now as we start
commute working from home and as we have
people there there are lots of people
I'm sure you probably know some there
say I'm getting out of the city and I
ain't going back I mean right now New
York City all the movie companies in New
York their warehouses are stuck full of
people who called him and said I fled
the city with from the coronavirus I
want you to clean out my apartment put
it in a warehouse and I'll tell you
where to send it when I get myself
situated mm-hmm I mean that's a
phenomenon that's already happening well
where are those people going to go I
mean ideally they would we would
actually spread out and and create a
more you know spread out population on
the on the landscape
people are realizing the hazards of
living on top of each other like that
not just because of virus and the things
spread like wildfire through the
population but also when you have to get
out if something goes down and you got
to get out of there and you realize like
I don't even have a car right like I
can't what am I gonna do carry my bed on
my back like what are you gonna do yeah
and people realize like hey maybe this
isn't the best idea to live like this
and then when they look at the prospects
of New York City going back to normal
like what it was five months ago
boy that's a long road you might be two
years from now before it's like that
again right that's right it might not
happen at all this is the other thing I
was watching this this documentary on
the construction of viruses this piece
and they were talking about like this
that when they give an 18-month window
for creating a vaccine for this virus
they're like but maybe not right yeah
maybe does maybe they don't come up with
one that's effective no it's impossible
to we've been for two years with the flu
still don't have a flu vaccine
what is the flu shot then there's a moon
shot well that's that's supposedly to
help the flu but there's how many
strains of it and they never hit the
right strain I mean the actual the
actual efficacy of the flu shot
has not been determined it is a vaccine
though it is but a Peter Hotez on who is
an expert in vaccines and infectious
diseases and tropical diseases and one
of the things he was saying that if you
get the flu shot even if it's not for
the correct strain there's still enough
pieces of this well that will protect
you from getting really bad sickness
from the flu strain even if it's the
wrong strain that's one opinion I don't
I don't agree with that opinion I think
when you're out there drinking with cows
absolutely when this when this all broke
we sent out we sent a letter out to our
customers saying hey come to the farm
take off your shoes walk barefoot
through the pasture we've got a nice big
compost pile stick your hands in the
compost pile
you know we feed your microbiome I did
anybody take you up on that offer oh
yeah oh yeah we've had some freaks out
there oh yeah
that's great taking their hand and put
yeah yeah that's great it's great and
and so you check on them see if they're
okay a couple of weeks later I don't
think anybody's gotten sick from it it's
Jack but but yeah but I think I think
that that in general we need to be
asking as a nation I mean I'm still
waiting for when they do the daily
briefs up there in the White House I'm
still waiting for somebody up there
anybody somebody to step to the
microphone and say look folks let's talk
about immunity yeah let's talk about how
you build immunity and the fact that
we're in the middle of this and we've
still got the coke trucks running up and
down the road and and Matt and look I
like a coke you know once a year twice a
year okay but but there's a big
difference between doing that and three
times a day where what are we eating are
we eating you know comfort food taco
chips look I like chocolate but enough
is enough you know and and are we
getting our kitchens are we are we
actually getting good food or are we are
we hydrating all of us are most of us
are dehydrated because the water tastes
bad well let's let's make sure we eat to
drink half a gallon a day let's let's
start there how about sleep are you
getting you know eight and a half hours
a night or you stand up watching Netflix
because you're depressed eating you know
chips and drinking soda because you're
depressed and getting six hours of sleep
all of that builds up hey how about how
about have you forgiven everybody you
know resentment resentment each you I
mean it eats you up resentment you know
vengeance resentment and and and some it
guilt yes guilt and whatever you stole
give it back yeah yeah and and if you've
got a if you've got a bad situation with
somebody call them up apologize you
fucked up
yeah be the first be the first
exact let it go let it go let it go and
I just think I just think that those
simple like you know six or seven
immutability get exercise go get outside
run around in the Sun alright those
kinds of things if we I mean you know
Michelle Obama had the let's move
campaign it was a great campaign she was
she was right on okay and I'm not trying
to be political I'm just she was she was
right and now I mean my my driver that
picked me up from the airport last night
you know he said he said you know this
is my first he said this is my first job
for a month and he said all I've been
doing is inside the house watching
Netflix well that's not gonna build your
immune system he needs to get out and go
stick his hand in poo I mean I don't
know if this is true but I would imagine
that the immune system is like your
cardiovascular system it needs a workout
it does and many people believe this in
fact there's an entire school of thought
the you know that this hyper allergenic
thing where a lot of the allergies we
have today are because we're so sterile
I mean this was part of the part of the
kind of unspoken part of the book Guns
Germs and Steel yeah you know that was a
fascinating book and it talked about the
ascendancy of the Europeans who kept
livestock in their house right and
that's why they were immune to smallpox
and meet all these things that were
devastating to the other people that
didn't have nearby livestock and so we
want our customers to come out and pet a
calf go in the brooder and pick up a
chick and hold a chicken and and we
think that that's really really that's
not just that's not just whatever
nostalgic I would be interested to see
what's good I'm sorry but what's gonna
happen when people do go back to normal
life with these compromised immune
systems from being inside all the time
whether or not just regular
and cold kicks in on a larger scale well
there are medical doctors I can't give
you names right now but I'm like you I'm
sleuthing all this different material
and I can tell you there are our
numerous medical doctors who are saying
that as we come out of this we're going
to see a spate of exactly colds flu
different things because we haven't been
exercising our immune systems you know
in this soup and in fact Governor Cuomo
was it was interesting his reaction the
other day when he got the report the
data now there's a you know more data is
coming out every day and one of the
reports that just came out last week was
that in New York the people who
continued working actually had less less
whatever positives to the virus than the
people who sheltered across the
demographic including frontline hospital
workers which you know you look at that
and you say well you know the people who
were sheltering they were dwelling on I
mean they were watching news all day if
you watch the media all day you are you
are scared to death okay and rightly so
that's what you're feeding your mind but
if you're if you're working and you're
building and you're creating and you're
doing your doing your things sure you
might think about the virus once in a
while but I mean literally in my day I
don't think about it but a few minutes a
day it's only when I come in and turn on
the news or look at podcast you know
that I'm I'm besieged with I'm
interested in it but but I'm out there
busy and and there's something that
happens I think psychosomatically when
you just consume in your mind is
consumed every day with with fear
yeah for sure well it's the media's
played into it and and also people
overhearing they're hearing terrible
stories about emergency rooms
particularly in New York City and places
where it's stuffed full of people and
the hospitals are overrun the
see user run over run thank goodness
that that is sort of calmed down even in
New York City like Cuomo basically said
today that they're back to where they
were when the pandemic exploded so it's
nice that they've sort of leveled that
out but what's gonna happen when you
just let people out again are they gonna
start getting sick like crazy again I
mean is it going to be another spread
there's a real worry about that and
we're worried that during this time we
haven't been encouraging people to build
up their immune system we have been
encouraging them to exercise we've just
been feeding them fear yes that's right
that's it's been it's been a feeling of
fear and so you know interestingly I've
just I've got a book that's actually
well having hand me in whatever ten days
a new book I mean I've written with a
with a nutritionist biochemist dr.
Sheena McCullough and the title of the
book is beyond labels and it's it's a
it's a doctor and a farmer leads you to
a place of food empowerment you know
when you stand in front of a bunch of
labels and you see everything from
organic certified Fairtrade to you know
natural that they're very confusing
they're very and Pete what happens is
when you have when you're faced with so
much choice of of label information you
tend to just shut down you get paralyzed
you say forget it you know it's too
complicated it's too it's too difficult
and so so we've written this book
Hershey from this chemistry standpoint
me from a farmer's standpoint trying to
cut through this and so people can be
empowered to actually to actually make
food decisions that will and we talked a
lot about immunity might feeding your
microbiome to build that up so that you
have a diversified enough exercised
enough immune system that you can
withstand this and and so I
think that I think that developing a
robust immune system think about if that
occupied your mind how am I gonna
develop in a robust immune system just
think about dwelling on that as opposed
to oh no am I gonna get it am I gonna
get it right I don't think we've
scratched the surface as to what
thinking I'm gonna build my immune
system let's must be appropriate let's
let's go get them okay let's just just
the mind-body connection what that does
to your body to suddenly get a burst of
hope as opposed to a constant diet of
despair well it has to have a big factor
it's just I mean that kind of stress
plays a big factor with people's immune
systems all the time when people are
stressed out they always get sick it's
real real common it just makes sense and
I think this kind of fear particularly I
mean the way I was experiencing it when
the when the lockdown was first ordered
and everyone was at the supermarket no
one was wearing masks yet but everyone
was stockpiling food and you know we
were nervous we were real nervous
because we didn't know what this was
gonna be like and we were also I was
nervous particularly because I feel like
the information we were getting out at
China was not correct and I was worried
that when you see those videos of them
spraying disinfectant on houses and
buildings it's like maybe this is way
worse than we think it is and it's gonna
hit America really hard because we've
been lied to by the Chinese there was a
lot of fear so I remember lying in bed
at night and like testing my breath like
maybe I have it now he's gonna get worse
you know there's a lot of that yeah
there's a lot of that I didn't sleep
real good at all for maybe the first few
days of lockdown until I sort of calmed
down and realized well I'm not going
anywhere
I can't get it you know and then I got
tested I'm like okay well this is nice
to know that I don't have it currently
like maybe if I just keep doing what I'm
doing I won't get it but then you'd you
know I'd have days where half the day
I'd think this is all bullshit but we
need to do is tell people how to
strength their immune system and then
you read some crazy story about some new
inflammatory syndrome they're finding on
you know some patients where you know
their their feet are swelling up yeah
blue toes yeah all this yeah they get
scared again yeah I'm totally with you
and I think that that brings up the
issue of how our society now have used
death I read an interesting article just
in the last couple of days about how how
as we have left it used to be when we
were kids we used the term somebody drop
dead remember that you know they just
drop dead little days all right
well today we don't say they drop dead
we say apparently medicine failed them
or the hospital it's like it's like
instead of just people yeah we do drop
dead instead every death is some sort of
a failure of our techno sophisticated
cryogenic you know system that's
supposed to keep everybody you know
beautiful and perfect forever perfect
forever and and the fact the fact is you
know and I think that's an advantage of
on the farm where we are I mean we we
see death every day I mean we we know
that things and and in fact in fact
death makes room I mean a compost pile
is its death in life I mean it's it's
it's you've got microbes eating stuff
that was living and then and then that
makes new life and of course my family
knows it that when I go they're supposed
to put me in a compost pile you know
dude really yeah yeah put me in a
compost pile I mean is that legal though
don't they have to cremate you I think
sighs I think that at least put me in
the ground or something but that's my
joke yeah I think they're allowed to
just put you in the ground I think they
have to pump you up with chemicals no no
no no no my dad my dad we did nothing
read anything nope in the ground and
that was it and they do have to sign
paperwork saying he didn't kill you dad
or anything he just you know would no no
what we did have to get was a special
use permit for a family graveyard so
we've got we've got ten we've got
permission for 10 spots
so you don't have to use formaldehyde no
no but nothing no everywhere else you do
though correct
you either cremate or well formaldehyde
and I think these formaldehyde before
they cremate well there's there are now
burgeoning around the country there are
natural cemeteries really yeah and and
there they're especially primitive
cemeteries where there's you know
nothing nothing is is used but we're
promised as they can't exhume anybody
right exhume your bones I guess yeah
about the bones would stay for a good
while we know the bones last a long time
but you know my my thing is that look I
don't want I don't want a bunch of
people to die but but the fact is that
that death is is transformative and I
don't get all too mystical and spiritual
but whatever your your spiritual
tradition is mine happens to be
judeo-christian ethics so I think there
is an afterlife but but but even even if
even if there's nothing even if you say
well I'm dead and there's no spirit and
I'm gone even so that makes room for
tomorrow's babies it makes room for new
ideas new things I mean you you you
can't you can't have you can't have life
without the regenerative regenerative
capacity of death and and and the the
foundation of ecology is life death
decomposition regeneration life death
not regeneration might be look like
something else okay but but that's
that's that's our digestion
it's compost it's you know it's
everything and when and when we get
sterilized and and and move away from
that I think we lose the beauty of the
transformative capacity of that part of
life yeah I think it speaks to what you
were talking about earlier that they
look at death as some sort of a failure
instead of just a part of the natural
cycle I was reading about one of the you
know they try to find new ways that the
coronavirus looks terrible and
and articles and one thing they were
saying was it takes between two and ten
years off the life of life expectancy of
the average person who gets it I'm like
okay well how did you come to that
conclusion well I came to that
conclusion because they looked at old
people who got it that might have
possibly lived you know seven eight
years five years more and they just
started doing these random calculations
based on how old people normally died
but then the problem with that is if you
look at the overall numbers the average
age that people die from coronavirus is
actually older than the average age
people die which is like well what are
you saying that okay it's taking years
off some people's lives but everything
does if you fall down it takes years off
your life if you're old right you die
from falling that fall should we stop
all falling if you get sick you need too
much sugar yes well that's a big one
right and that's one that's killing
people at almost the same numbers as the
coronavirus was at the peak I remember
there was like a grab the chrono virus
has passed heart attacks but wait a
minute how many goddamn heart attacks
are there something we could do about
heart attacks forget about that now this
is a pandemic yeah I mean cigarettes no
one even touched with a ten-foot pole
cuz cigarettes is killing people at four
and five times the rate coronavirus was
and no one was saying anything of it
because it's an elective thing you're
allowed to do it it's a freedom people
enjoy it you're grown adults here let's
stay home stay home and wear eye masks
and don't touch anything and stay home
and you're gonna lose your job but stay
home because you're not really grown
adult you're growing
I'll let you smoke cigarettes at home
how about that you feel better yeah well
I think I think I think a couple things
one is that you know our country has
never told people when we talk about you
know personal self-worth and your own
personal affirmation in a climate of
fear and worry the worst thing you can
do is tell lots of people you're not
important you're not essential yeah you
know what you've been doing all your
life what you do every day now it's it's
not as
what a faster way to whatever D affirm
you know a person then to tell them
you're not essential I mean I just think
it's horrible and and now we have the
data and again yeah these data points
and we've all become I think through
this more wary of statisticians yeah but
but one that I just saw again this week
was that every every % increase in
unemployment equals 30,000 deaths in our
country annually every 1% unemployment
equal to aside depression you know
whatever that's a really important
statistic it is what so so so we've gone
now from you know that that white-hot
three and a half percent unemployment to
now what eighteen and a half that's
fifteen fifteen percent I'm frankly I'm
frankly actually amazed that we're at
only eighteen percent right now but I
think that's only because a lot of
people have been furloughed and are not
unemployed so so you know if all those
people go back to work that have been
furloughed your restaurants and things
like that
it'll be okay but anyway we've we've
increased in the last sixty days fifteen
percent in unemployment if that thirty
thousand figure is actually correct
that's an additional four hundred fifty
thousand people a year you know dying
from from external ramifications of
being unwanted and this is in line with
what you said earlier about costs right
right like we were you're talking about
the cost of food but and then look at
the cost of health care and when the
cost of food is higher and food is
higher quality look at that the cost of
health where it drops in an equal number
right and I think this is this is along
those lines with we're looking at deaths
through the coronavirus but we're saying
oh you're putting dollars over lives
you're saying the economy is more
important than people's lives no we're
saying you need a nuanced perspective
because if you ignore the economy it
actually cost lives and it costs a
staggering number of life
and in a horrible way suicide drug
addiction depression right and if I if I
may go a little just one other little
thread on this whole thing again
thinking about well where are how can we
employ all the people I mean if our if
our discretionary spending if this is
going to make people more careful about
discretionary spending you know flying
to Paris going on a Caribbean cruise
going to the Sandals resort cheap those
Caribbean cruises are Jamie and I have
been going over this it's basically
cheaper than being homeless you could be
on a cruise for like five to seven
nights for a hundred five bucks with
all-you-can-eat Wow where are you gonna
get that kind of out that's right you're
not going to so if I was a homeless
person
I'll just get me a constant strange of
cruise ship you get a figure that's five
thousand bucks a year yeah all right a
little bit more than five thousand bucks
here you live like a king Wow a little
spot see they want you to pay for booze
I think pretty sure that's what it is
that's where they make their money yeah
ridiculous
cheap bore kind of like gas stations
make their money on on jerky and you
know and soft drinks anymore yeah I
don't make their money on gas
but anyway so one of the things that
that we're key on because our fertility
program is carbon and that's what feeds
the soil carbon right not ten tenth and
chemical fertilizer carbon and so and
our use fertilizers at all no no we
don't amazing we don't so just manure
and no further honors but we have a big
industrial chipper you love this machine
I mean it's the ultimate you know boy
toy you know it's a hundred and twenty
horsepower diesel engine that can that
can chip 19-inch you can take a 40-foot
tree and just tuck it in there and it
just wah wah you know just seen those
online all right well I mean they're
like the ultimate there's coolest
missionary scares the shit out of me
alright so so but that's them the Fargo
that's our fertilizer factory that okay
so carbon so we integrate forests with
open land and and we integrate the
carbon from the forests so we cut junk
trees dead trees crooked trees weak
trees and thin the forest and that
enables the good trees the healthy trees
to grow more vigorously better reduces
fire potential because you're you know
you're thinning it out taking out all
the dead stuff and that then becomes our
carbon base for bedding the animals for
you know and for all the composting that
we do and we do you know mountains and
mountains of compost where I'm going
with this is when we talk about costs
right now how much is our country
spending fighting wildfires and how much
are we losing fighting all these funds I
mean we're in California right I mean
look at the the devastation that fires
have caused imagine imagine if those if
we had thousands of people with chippers
thinning the forest turning them into
almost park-like like they were before
the Europeans came the Native Americans
kept them going with you know with fire
but there were there was megafauna here
megafauna and so we graze through we
convert a lot of it into you know
silvopasture widely spaced trees that
are growing unimpeded with with grazing
animals underneath so that there's no
fire damage there's no buildup of fuel
and suddenly we're producing our own
food and we're eliminating the danger of
wildfire with technology called
chainsaws and chippers and that carbon
becomes the fertility for the vineyards
and the and the agricultural lands it
feeds the soil so now we have earthworms
instead of hard soil we don't have
erosion because our organic matter is up
on our farm using these principles we've
gone in we've
from 1% organic matter to over 8%
organic matter in the soil and every 1%
holds another 20,000 gallons of water
per acre whoa
so so if we so if we so in our 60 years
of being there in the show at polyphase
we have gone from 1 percent to 8 over 8
percent let's just say that's 7 clicks 7
times 20 is a hundred and forty thousand
gallons of water per acre now that we
can hold that we couldn't hold before
and it's because of the grazing the
perennials and the composting that's
building up the organic matter in the
soil that could be done in California
when you start talking about holding
water it's not just about how much
rainfall are we getting it's how much
are we actually holding in the sponge
right to reduce you know flooding and
runoff and things like that so it sounds
like your method could keep from the
situation they find with some farms of
the roading topsoil with a constantly
supplement right but how would you how
do you grow enough corn like if you want
to have like those mono crop
agricultural fields mm-hmm where you see
hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of
acres of corn just corn or just soybeans
or just alfalfa whatever it is like if
you want to do those mono crop things
you how are you going to re fertilize
the soil in the same manner with that
you don't have it to scale you don't
have them you don't have their solutions
there's now corns corns and amazing
plants so we're soybeans so I'm not all
I'm saying is that right now our corn
crop in in the US what is it 30% go stat
goes to alcohol for fuel well that takes
more energy than the than the fuel we
get so ethanol ethanol yeah we don't
need that
I mean all is a byproduct of what we
used to think that we needed ethanol
exactly gas right right so so that's not
that's not necessary okay thank you
fracking yeah so so that's not good
either
No so we don't need we don't need to
grow that corn well you know you know
come on electric vehicles and and that I
mean that all that's changing the
landscape a lot but a lot of it for
agriculture well yeah so so that so then
the next is to feed to feed cattle so
another huge percentage like twenty
percent goes to feed cattle and then
another huge percent goes to hogs and
chickens of course but one of the
problems with the hogs and chickens is
that they are not integrated with the
food system so right now right now fifty
percent almost fifty percent but it's
arguable you know who statistician again
figures lie and lie your figure but
somewhere between forty and fifty
percent of human edible food on the
planet is never eaten by a human it
spoils it's thrown away and seventy five
percent of everything that goes into
landfills is biodegradable so when you
start matching up the waste that the
waste streams and the losts of the
losses in our food system and our waste
streams what happens is very quickly you
start seeing that it's desegregated it's
this it's this single species single
crop single segregated notion where it's
not related it's not symbiotic it's not
synergistic that actually creates the
problem a city in Belgium this was this
was articulated in Pat Foreman's
wonderful book the title is city chicks
and she talks you talk about urban
chickens a city in Belgium offered three
chickens per household to anybody that
wanted a chicken and they had 2,000
families raised her hand says yeah we'll
take three chickens so they got six
thousand chickens distributed through
this to this city and in the first month
it dropped a hundred tons of food waste
to the landfill riots and so not only
did they eliminate the landfill waste
all these people now suddenly had
chickens and Pat's done all the math on
this and shows that if one in three
households had
chickens to eat your kitchen scraps
there would not be a there would not be
an egg industry in the United States it
would be completely on non-essential
really so that's the power of
integration that's the power of
approximate of actual putting stuff
close you know so they wouldn't have an
egg industry because every burden would
be grown there everybody have their own
eggs yeah yeah and the landfills
that landfill would get way way less
material and so so then so then the
chickens don't need the corn from the
cornfields so the fields can be turned
back into prairie to feed herbivores
which now would be cows not bison but
that's our that's our herbivore of value
and so now you're at perennials instead
of annuals and perennials instead of
annuals perennials put energy in the
soil annuals extract energy from the
soil so now suddenly you're producing
your instead of producing an annual
fertilized with petroleum to feed beef
for somebody else instead you're not
growing the corn you don't need the
tractor you don't need the petroleum the
cows fertilize it themselves and the
perennial builds the soil like it did
with the Bison and you have the beef
instead of coming out of a feedlot it's
coming off the Prairie like the Bison
did and suddenly you're building soils
that are losing soil and your production
doesn't change one iota it doesn't take
any more land to produce the beef with
what I've described than what it does
with corn don't take any more land okay
so you're you're you're essentially
saying that they have to convert to not
just growing corn that's right they're
gonna have to do a different kind of
farms right that's right corn corn is I
mean that kind of mono crop mono
speciated thing is is a complete I mean
we started the interview talking about
standing on nature on her neck you know
that is a quintessential example of
standing on nature's neck and you know
the reason our farm was so deteriorated
when we came to it was because we're in
we're in Virginia's Shenandoah Valley
and you know that was the breadbasket of
the Confederacy during the Civil War if
you know your history and and and
essentially the war was finally won when
when they burned all the crops in the
Shenandoah Valley and and and during
that time the valley lost somewhere
between three and five feet of soil
during that that time period so the
soils are worn out and then we got the
westward expansion and it all moved to
Ohio and Indiana and then finally the
Dakotas and you know kept heading west
so this this head west head west young
man head west was partly because our
agriculture destroyed the soils and if
we don't if we don't start using our
agriculture to build soils we have a lot
more to worry about than a than a Cova
nineteen deal a lot more to worry about
if we don't figure out a way to produce
food abundantly and grow soil while
we're doing it the pandemic is going to
be the least of our concerns there's a
thing that keeps getting repeated and
it's that we only have sixty more
seasons left and our topsoil this is a
thing that gets repeated it almost as if
there's no solution to this that because
we have to feed so many people we're
we're doomed and what you're saying is
no we just can't do it this way because
this Way's unsustainable it's unnatural
to begin with that's exactly right so we
so we have to fundamentally change we
have to we have to we have to use our
carbon our biomass strategically which
includes food scraps by the way you use
everything sturdy you can't just throw
stuff away right this is this is this is
sunlight that's supposed to be
decomposed I mean the fact that
landfills get get green environmental
awards for poking methane methane tubes
in the landfill and running running the
the excavation equipment on the methane
from the decomposing of
in a landfill it's it's it's shouldn't
be in there no no it's unconscionable no
what we need to do is is hook up
we need hookups we need to where the
waste streams like the move right into
the the use of streams and and you have
circles not linear not linear thinking
and I mean just another one for example
is is ponds a lot of people don't
realize that before the Europeans came
to North America North America was eight
percent water today were less than one
percent I mean I mean surface area think
about the United States being 80 percent
water including eight percent right
eight eight I'm sorry
eight percent eight percent water I mean
think about that in in Utah Nevada New
Mexico all right where'd all that water
come from
beavers massive massive beaver
populations I mean there were 200
million beavers and we now know
archaeologically digging up skeletons
some of them were as big as a Volkswagen
car really these were big big the
megafauna the megafauna
is incredible I mean it's the same as
the wombats in Australia you know now
these wombats are like you know 80
pounds or a little you know cute little
wombats well they know by digging up
skeletons they used to have nine-foot
wombats in Australia nine-foot wombats
so so when we look at the megafauna that
was here you know the fact is that the
planet used to have more animal weight
on it than it does today with all the
animals all the factory farms and all
the people so it's it's not people and
animals that are messing up the planet
it's it's our it's the human management
of the ecosystem that's messing up the
abundance here is is through the roof so
so imagine imagine if if we and that's
what we've been doing on our farm is
every time we get a few extra dollars we
build another pond now we're not beavers
but but we have you know we have
excavation equipment that we can go in
and build ponds so that when we have a
flood
and and everything is flooding we're
actually trapping a lot of that not all
of it but trapping a lot of it up on
high ground permaculture style that we
can then dispense for irrigation and a
dry time so that we never pumped from an
aquifer that's the Commons when you pump
from an aquifer you're depleting the
Commons but if you're if you're reducing
flooding and using that in a drought to
keep vegetation growing when there's so
much sunlight then you're actually
increasing the Commons and we believe
very strongly that as a result of our
farming we should not be depleting the
Commons we should be increasing the
Commons as a result of art there should
be more soil more water more breathable
air more you know more wildlife more
pollinators more there's also been a
false narrative that it tributes most of
our greenhouse gases are a significant
number of significant percentage of our
greenhouse gases coming from cows and
and cow a Greek altar and one of the
things that they've found through using
satellite imaging and when they were
trying to detect methane they're finding
its landfills that these landfills are a
huge huge problem in terms of greenhouse
gases yeah that this the the total wrong
way of approaching it the way you were
saying burying this biological material
in the ground instead of using it as
compost is actually not just
counterproductive but it's actually
detrimental yes it's not the wrong way
to do it because it doesn't serve the
soil it actually fucks up the air it's
not a zero it's a negative it's a
negative yeah the same amount of
biological material it's just managed
incorrectly which is really crazy when
you stop and think about sure it is if
if all if all the biomass that we have
what's the word non leveraged or or
thrown away if all the biomass we've
thrown away in the last you know 100
years if it had instead been leveraged
for soil building feeding chickens I
mean whatever you know today we would
not have all that methane
and today we would have soils that were
that would be a lot richer and we would
have you know better earthworm
populations you know we'd have a
tremendous amount of of soil maintain
soil abundant fertility and so the
beautiful thing is that this this is not
that difficult to bring back I mean I've
been preaching this message you know all
my life and it's exciting to now
suddenly have people stepping back and
realize wow you know we just kind of put
a pause button and there are now you
know dolphins in Venice again there's
you know you in Shanghai you can see
across the street you know there's blue
how about la ya la I mean amazing
amazing pictures so so that when people
say let's get back to normal look I I
don't I don't want I don't want the the
whatever that the tragedy that we're
having but I also don't want to go back
to normal because normal was this foot
on nature's yeah neck saying you know
we're gonna so so that's where you start
saying well you know what what does the
future look what what could a future
looked like and that's where we start
talking about decentralization
integration you know integrating our all
of our streams and large-scale change oh
it really large very large goes very
very very disruptive very disruptive but
everybody has a job everybody has a new
thing I mean my thing about the carbon
economy of course you know we're there
in that hardwood region of Virginia you
know near the Blue Ridge Parkway should
into a national park all that stuff and
and the the federal forests are
atrocious I mean dead trees the fuel
buildup is fuel buildup is just
ridiculous ok you know wouldn't it be
cool if if mommy or daddy could come
home and their six-year-old says you
know what did you do today and mommy and
daddy are able to say well we we
stewarded you know five acres up on jack
mountain and
and kept it from having a fuel load to
burn and took that biomass so that a
farmer could feed his earthworms so
there'd be soil for your future there
will be abundance and soil for your
future I mean what an affirming sacred
righteous vocation that would be and and
it would affirm people who want to work
outside and have calluses and blisters
on their hands you know we've spent a
we've spent a couple generations
marginalizing what we call blue-collar
people and and one of the big issues
right now as we go to an AI you know a
techno future is what do we do with
people that like to work outside with
their hands and and sweat you know that
the Michael row you know the the Dirty
Jobs I'm suggesting that a carbon
economy is one of many many pathways to
actually envisioning a future where
thousands and thousands of people would
be employed in healing ministries so
that we'd be caressing our nest you know
so many times the the idea in
agriculture in the farming community is
that that nature is a nature's a a
reluctant partner that we've gotta you
know we got to get them in our wrestling
hole we gotta dominate and conquistador
and we're gonna make you you know we're
gonna Bush you when actually nature is a
benevolent lover that just wants to be
caressed and we haven't and we haven't
put attention on caressing in the right
places for a long time
isn't it also that when you say the word
we god there's so many of us and so many
people are already invested in doing
these jobs that are actually
counterproductive for nature right like
these people that run these mono crop
farms sure soybeans or what-have-you
sure like boy that's a battleship that's
going to be difficult to turn around it
is but the power so you say well where
do you start what you start at your at
your dinner
play and that's why at our farm our
little moniker on our little you know
our little cooler bags is healing the
land one bite at a time we want our
people to know that that what's on your
plate when it's multiplied a billion
times you know that actually creates the
legacy the legacy ecology you're leaving
for your grandchildren that that somehow
that that has to be made and people have
to understand that and I think that the
the wake up call the shock the jar the
the emotional jarring of this pandemic I
mean we're seeing for the first time
people who never would have darkened our
door or asked us for anything they're
asking us and that's why you know that's
why I see and I wrote this book beyond
labels and and and you know we started
this a year ago we had no idea that it
would launch in the middle of this but
but we realized hey this this is a
timely thing what we're having I mean
we're having people call me
can I go by land near you that you'll
manage so I have a bunker you know when
things go wonky we I mean for that for
the first time I've never heard this
before but it's happening around the
country people like us we're getting
calls how can I get on your first class
list how can I get on your business
class in other words for the first time
in our history we've been in business
now for you know half a century we were
in it before organic was cool you know
we were we were one of those early you
know very very early and for you know
for thirty years we were the only game
in town that was fun alright and twenty
years ago things as people started you
know awareness and farmers markets and
Walt you know all this and so so now
we're not by any means the game that
game in town but so for the first time
in half a century
we're actually rationing probably don't
have enough we've got way more demand I
did a post the other day you know that
pandemic is the best marketing strategy
for you
for us for us okay and so we're just you
know we're rationing here and so now P
our people are getting scared and so
there are farmers like us that are
actually talking about starting kind of
an insurance premium you want to get on
our business-class list so you always
have a seat pay US $500 a year in
premium and you're our top 10% so you
know these money so that they would have
definite access to food dentist definite
access for food first yeah yeah how much
could you scale up your business oh it's
it has limits but our ability to scale
is only based on personnel you know how
many people and land base and we've got
a we've got to have enough land base to
scale and we need we needed a bigger
team but no I mean our principals but
but see we don't scale let me let me
explain it this way there's a guy
there's a guy David Schafer and he he
does a cool thing as you know our
country is now a repository for shipping
containers you know metal shipping
containers we've got millions of you can
buy them cheap scrap metal because China
makes everything ships it here and if we
don't ship anything back but you know
microchips so they don't take very many
shipping containers so we're building up
these mountains of shipping containers
so this guy is figured out how to take a
shipping container and simply refurbish
it into a very small inspectable poultry
processing mobile poultry processing
facility mm-hmm so I can call him and
and for $100,000 he'll customize it to
what I want
put a chassis under it drive it to my
place put it on four pillars it's not
even a building so the no built building
permit required put it on four pillars
and I've got a little federal inspected
processing facility that I can do you
know a hundred and fifty thousand
chickens a year okay
so for me when you say how do you scale
up for me it's not well I'm gonna if we
hit a hundred and fifty and overrun the
ability of this little facility
it's called platinum box PIB and his his
pot his blog is thinking inside the box
because it's his thing as platinum box
so instead of if if we had sales for
over a hundred fifty thousand chickens
well then you don't you don't expand
this and make it bigger you duplicate it
so your expansion is by duplication not
by concentration and scale on site then
what happens there's a sweet spot here
there's a sweet spot if you if you don't
overrun your your ecology so we're gonna
set this thing you set this thing on a
piece of on a on a farm so the acreage
is enough to handle the processing water
and you compost all the guts on site now
you don't have to run a sewage treatment
plant you don't have to truck your guts
to a rendering plant they become
fertilizer on site call this fertigation
and and it's a sweet spot that the
industry doesn't have and so there's no
reason why we can't produce a million
chickens and you just have eight of
these scattered you know five miles
apart six miles apart and once you get
them processed and they're in a bag you
gonna put them in a tractor trailer and
ship them anywhere okay that's not the
bottleneck the bottleneck is integrating
the processing with the production
that's the bottleneck right now in our
in our fragile system and so if we can
if we can do an integrative approach and
and have a democratized decentralized
approach then suddenly we have an
ecological humane people friendly
community friendly nutrient friendly
system has anybody ever come to you and
said hey our community is
kind of screwed up we don't have a good
food source here would you help us
establish something like this
yeah I've been have you designed these
things for folks not I mean not for a
whole community like this it sounds like
that would be a great thing though yeah
especially now when we're realizing that
it's difficult when this the food supply
chain goes down or something goes wrong
and it's difficult to get food to people
wouldn't it be great to have me I've
always had this that it would be great
if you had like the neighborhood had
like one large plot of land and everyone
in the neighborhood lived off that plot
of land sure said it like have a little
mini Central Park in every neighborhood
right right you're talking my language I
mean the idea of well I mean you're
familiar with urban agriculture mm-hmm I
mean we have food deserts right food
deserts is a big big problem but a lot
of times food deserts are in pretty
rundown parts of the city that have
vacant lots and there's there's a lot of
productive capacity in these places I
was one of the interesting ones I was on
was in st. Louis and these three young
couples had come together and they had
they had purchased an old it was an old
crack house that the city bulldozed so
there's this vacant lot it was you know
half an acre it wasn't very big half an
acre and these three couples they got
apartments nearby like within you know
two minutes walk and it was in a pretty
rundown area of the city a rundown
neighborhood and they just started
farming in this in this half acre and
told all the neighbors brings your food
scraps they got some chickens
they started making compost they put up
a little greenhouse they put up a
kitchen and very very simple poor boy
bootstrap you know nothing and they
quickly became a whole community
whatever a place for kids to come
because kids were mesmerized by the
chickens they had a worm bed the plants
growing they cooked stuff and I was
there you know I was there with them for
a couple of hours and here come here
come kids down the sidewalk you know
pulling a little red wagon with food
scraps in it and and they're feeding the
worm beds and it's it's fantastic they
were feeding like you know 30 families
out of this old crack house foundation
that's amazing and it was just wonderful
and they were doing it as a gift to the
inner city you know as a as a gift to
the inner city but I asked them I said
so so how much of st. Louis's food could
be produced this way they said if you
take out the dairy and the beef you know
that the big the big mega stuf st. Louis
could feed its entire city within the
city limits this way Wow
and that's true in Detroit it's true in
Baltimore it might not be true in LA but
the but but here's the thing we don't
have to solve every single person's
problem to start solving some and our
problem is so many times I start down
this path and somebody starts throwing
at me the most extreme situation and you
know what I don't have all the answers
for the most extreme situation you know
the the single mom of four minority in a
food desert in whatever okay I don't
have the answer to every single
situation but I'm looking at suburbia
I'm looking at at incredible things that
people are doing and opportunities and
if we just did what we know I mean I ran
into a lady in in in Edmonton British
club Alberta yeah thank you and she was
50 single lady living in a fifth floor
condominium just wanted to wanted to
farm in a worst way she had no money no
land nothing and she just had this
epiphany one day she said I know I have
one friend that has a backyard she went
to this friend with a backyard she said
would you mind if I grew up like a 10
foot by 10 foot garden in your back I
just want to grow something friend said
sure sure sure so she gave her 10 10 by
10 plot group started a garden
well the lady's neighbor saw the garden
and she said do you think your friend
would put a garden in my backyard and
lay some walnut I'll ask well sure I met
this lady 18 months after this initial
conversation with her friend she was
farming 18 backyards had a part-time
employee was a full-time farmer her her
all of her tools were on the side of her
bicycle she bicycles from spot to spot
to spot with all of her tools and her
she started a business called on
borrowed ground and growing food so the
thing is is their creativity is their
opportunity oh it's up the wazoo if we
would become as interested in this as we
are the latest dysfunction in the
kardashians
or you know they look you know what I'm
saying the latest whatever yeah and it's
not that we don't have time for it not
that we don't have money for it if
there's one really positive thing to
come out of this pandemic I hope that
it's a restructuring of what's valuable
in life and if we can if we can even
grab a 30% bump in that value trajectory
it will have been the best thing that
ever happened to that's a large bump but
yeah if we could restructure what's
valuable to us it's very important and
as you're talking about earlier what's
ascent and these essential businesses
what what is essential and non-essential
it's it's so arbitrary and strange and
this is something that politicians
really aren't supposed to have the power
to dictate what we can and can't do in
that way and they're not doing it in a
smart way like here's a perfect example
liquor stores are an essential business
you know it's non-essential business
Alcoholics Anonymous so Alcoholics
Anonymous is not allowed to have their
meetings but liquor stores are open
because they're essential that is ass
backwards thinking that doesn't make any
sense absolutely I mean yeah and in
Virginia
yeah we've got ours in Virginia as well
you know they open the liquor stores and
close the churches yeah they they oh
they open Walmart and close the farmers
market
I mean it's asinine it is it's
absolutely asinine and and and I would
even argue that they don't have the
constitutional authority to do that I
would examine and that would be my
argument but but boy fear you know fear
fear spawns things that we can't even
imagine what is it like where you are in
Virginia's restaurants open no no no so
we're so on May 15th we we entered
what's called phase one and so so
churches are allowed to meet again not
that the government could have ever
taken that away but anyway that's that's
that's that's generic that's the
narrative that's the narrative churches
can meet again we're still at the ten
person rule for for gatherings and
gatherings but a church as long as
they're at 50 percent capacity there
okay so so that's up and running
hairdressers are back to work a lot of
the like the personal hygiene barbers
hairdressers you know you know small
very small scale kind of things like
that are back but it's a it's a slow you
know it's a very very slow process yeah
it is in some play Texas is pretty wide
open
Texas nice restaurants hotels
everything's back up Phoenix is the same
way yeah right right
places are opening up comedy clubs again
at half capacity right right so I mean
we're having our we cancelled our first
two farm tours we do a we do what we
call the lunatic farm tour at the farm a
hundred people on hay wagons obviously
we can't social distance on hay wagons
you can't get people right so we're
having our first one May 30th it sold
out not a single person has complained
we've told him there won't be social
distancing you're on a hay wagon if
you're if you're uncomfortable then you
can walk the tour and we don't drive
fast you know we've got people Hana hay
wagons we're not you know we're not
driving at road speed so you can walk it
if you want to but our impression of the
feedback we've gotten is just relief
finally I can go somewhere I can be with
people I can you know that's the plus
side right we're gonna appreciate what
what it's like did ya
to do stuff to be able to go outside to
go to a restaurant to go to a public
gathering have a picnic yes that kind of
stuff yes yes I think all of our of our
historically normal social interactions
are gonna be much sweeter than they have
been in the past because we're social
beings we're not Hermits a few of us are
Hermits but not very many
most of us yeah like to see people and
and if there's one time when you want to
be together it's in hard times yes who
wants to go through hard times alone and
when I see these World War two vets
dying alone because their family can't
be around them the guy he's dying who
cares
you know if son and daughter and
grandkids want to come and be around him
I just well the fears that they'll get
it and they'll give it to someone else
and rice will wind up in terminal as
well understand what one of our problems
is that we haven't done controls you
know I I wish there had been one state
that said we're not gonna do anything so
that there could be one control right
but the problem is nobody's done it
control so we so we really we really
don't know well there's been places that
have less restrictions than others and
then also there's been countries that
have less restrictions of sweet yeah so
and you're getting it's it's really
difficult to parse the information and
bright and get a straight answer on it
is this is a good thing or a bad thing
all ultimately over the course of time
particularly you were talking about with
the unemployment rate equaling you know
1% equaling 30,000 lives over the rest
of the year
right I mean we really don't know what
that numbers going to look like here and
it could be absolutely devastating
it is I mean we already know that you
know suicides are up child abuse is up
spousal abuse is up we know that just
police review so you know that that's
serious and there are so many
demographics that we don't know like
like Sweden for example fifty fifty five
percent of all households in Sweden are
single single person be really all
agreeable people that's crazy
percent yeah yeah it's only 50% is
swingers
yeah in in Italy in Italy it's it's only
I think eight eighteen or twenty percent
something like that
so so there's a lot of
multi-generational households in Italy
so Italy's a much older older
demographic and and more people in a
household probably a lot more smooth we
do yes same thing in Spain Spain a lot a
lot of smoke and they got hit hard as
well right yes and they imagine that's
gonna lead to a compromised immune
system sure so you've got all the people
living together you've got a large
percentage of folks that are older and
then you got the cigarettes and the no
exercise not like I was this gym either
nice hotel would have just pathetic gym
yeah yeah this is nobody working out
over there yeah yeah yeah that's true
that's true and and as you know so as we
go forward with this thing I I look at
this and say well let's let's at least
wipe ourselves off and say okay what can
I learn from this well what can we learn
from this going forward and culturally
obviously we can learn well we need that
we need to decentralize and diversify
our food processing system I mean for me
that's like number one and and and then
for the for the average consumer though
I mean that that's that's a macro thing
but for the average consumer what can
you do to facilitate a secure food
system and your own secure food system
and
one is to simply start stockpiling more
food I mean have more food in the house
you don't have to go to the grocery
store three times a week buy in bulk go
to the go to the farmers market buy from
a farmer you can get you can get
20-pound bags of oatmeal you know you
don't have to get a little you know cup
full of Quaker Oats you can get you can
get rolled crimped oats by the 50-pound
bag it's it's it's pennies on the dollar
I mean this is how you save money you
buy and I mean we talk about price
interestingly our our whole chicken
price at Polyface is cheaper than
boneless skinless breasts from Tyson at
Walmart so the way to save money is to
get unprocessed hmm that's that's how
you eat well okay you know the famous
movie Food Inc the documentary Food Inc
you know wonderful movie but they they
presented the same thing remember where
that family went to the fast food place
and they said they couldn't afford
Tomatoes well a pound of our ground beef
is cheaper than that burger soft drink
and and massive fries that he got and
it's probably more nutrition and a half
a pound of our ground meat than that
whole meal but you can buy two pounds of
our ground meat for the price of that
whole meal the fact is that junk food is
not cheap junk foods expensive I mean
you start talking about nutrition I mean
a Snickers bar
Snickers bars is twice as expensive per
pound as as our grass-finished
world-class ground beef okay so when you
start looking at these kinds of things
you start realizing oh okay so so really
I just need to I just need to adjust
where my money's going in house meaning
so so spend so so spend on a bulk buy
bulk buy unprocessed get in your kitchen
yes and and and you know develop a love
for domestic culinary arts okay
and and kitchens are a great place to
teach your kids science you know
fractions a quarter-teaspoon great place
to teach your kids so so math math
fractions and stuff science you know
what happens when you put baking soda
with vinegar and all this stuff I mean
you know kitchens a great first learning
place and you're saying is great on
paper the problem is people are addicted
to eating terrible food
yeah and it's it's a real issue
particularly with highly sweet and
highly processed foods that are the
things they crave their and also their
gut biome you were talking about this
doctor that you know what does he push
dr. Zack Bush exactly yeah dr. Zack Bush
and that he's a biome expert I'm glad we
brought this up as well yeah because
that's an issue with people that have
their bodies accustomed to eating this
terrible food their biome is accustomed
to that terrible food so it's it starts
craving those Twinkies and oh listen the
food the food processing scientists they
ain't dumb no yeah they know they know
what our you know what our our primitive
you know hot buttons are mm-hmm
and yeah salty sweetie I mean boy they
know exactly what it is so yeah so is
that dr. Zack Bush has been actually
developing microbiome bolstering
concoctions to try to diversify your
microbiome you know one of the things
that that farmers like me that that
direct market to people one of our
concerns I mean I don't I don't talk a
lot about it but one of our concerns is
that our that our food for example our
chicken we don't immerse it in chlorine
you know so it actually has its living
food and and sometimes people are so
sterile in their microbiome that they
actually have to eat a little bit of
unprocessed you know a real food a
little bit at a time to build it up I
mean the other morning I was out in the
garden picking asparagus and you know I
had my knife and I was cutting it off of
course I love fresh I mean fresh garden
picked us I mean there's nothing like a
cool morning and a
old fat asparagus you know an inch thick
and I just eat it fresh it's got some
soil on it eat the soil you know just
grandma used to say you're supposed to
eat up half eat a pound of dirt before
you're 12 right remember I mean I had a
different grandma a different man but
you know how do we develop immune
systems in babies we don't put them in
plastic wrap bubble right we put them
around the floor and the next thing we
know they're there you know gnawing on
the dog toy and they've got a dust bunny
in their mouth and right this is how you
build an immune system kids kind of know
or nature knows that at least nature
knows that yeah I mean Richard Louv
writes about this in nature deficit
disorder which is of course an iconic
book about the importance of touching
nature and breathing in nature I mean
just the the bacteria that exudes from
vegetation and and the ecology of plants
powerful thing you know and we're told
they're cautious things down as soon as
you get them because they get have
pesticides on them yeah you gotta clean
up all the car that's way too cold live
from the spinach that's why you get food
from people that don't use pesticides
yeah and and you say well there's not
enough of that produced well as you said
it would be wonderful if this broadcast
went into every single household in the
world and tomorrow everybody said we're
gonna do different well I think a lot of
people are trying to do different
because this pandemic I mean I would
imagine the number of gardens has grown
up oh yes oh yes I know a lot of people
have looked into hunting yeah I know
that and and edible you know hunting
edible wild things what can I eat
you know dandelions lambs quarters
mushrooms yep yep yep so it's a
wonderful thing so yes this is really
this is really a good thing and the
whole what we call the homestead arts
there's a there's a big conference that
happens every year and in the East and
they're hoping that they can still have
it it's in October the homesteaders of
America conference and and two weeks ago
they had 10,000 new email signups for
their postings in one day hmm
I mean that gets your attention that's
huge
and it's in it's people that are looking
on how to how to garden I mean the
number of gardening questions just like
and seats
I mean seed companies are out all the
seed companies basically did a like a
three or four day moratorium this spring
you know because they ran out so this
summer what's gonna be in short supply
canning supplies are going to be short
dehydrators I'm sure you know produce
dehydrators are going to be hard to get
in our area right now you cannot get a
freezer now until August everything's
back ordered clear till the middle of
August everybody snarfed up the freezers
to be able to stockpile so that was one
of the things I was saying you know how
do we how do we go forward well you you
you do more for yourself and in our book
beyond beyond labels seen and I in end
up the last couple chapters are about
moving to a place where you actually are
producing some of your own food a
backyard flock of chickens a little you
know garden a little herb garden you
know and we have the technology now
Mother Earth News magazine I mean
they've they've led to led this thing
forever and you go to a mother earth
news fair and we were going to have the
first one on a farm this year at our
place expecting 10,000 people we had to
cancel those in July so it's rolled over
now to next year but there's every kind
of like you know like patio tube herb
garden with little pockets in it you
know and you you grow all of your own
herbs beehives on your house roof
there's so much there's so much that you
can do and so I encourage people to jump
in and just caress the mystery of life
and it's it's good for your nutrition
it's good for your soul it's good for
your spirit in a time where everybody's
concerned about death surround yourself
with something that's growing it's a
great thing you know I think that's a
great point
and maybe a great way to end this Joel
thank you very much I really appreciate
you and I appreciate your message and
and is just you really epitomize the
best example of that sort of
regenerative farming and and I really
wish would be more widespread thank you
Joe with your help it will be my
pleasure all right bye everybody
[Music]